---
description: Introduction to JWT ecosystem
---

# Basic concepts

JWT stands for JSON Web Token, which is a type of token that is used to securely transmit information between parties. A JWT is essentially a compact and self-contained JSON object that contains information about a user or entity in the form of claims or statements.

JWTs are commonly used for authentication and authorization purposes in web applications and APIs. When a user logs in or requests access to a protected resource, the server generates a JWT and sends it to the client. The client then sends the JWT in subsequent requests to prove its identity and access rights.

JWTs consist of three parts: a header, a payload, and a signature. The header contains information about the type of token and the algorithm used to sign it. The payload contains the claims or statements about the user or entity. The signature is a hashed value that is generated by combining the header and payload with a secret key.

JWTs are designed to be compact and efficient, making them suitable for use in distributed systems and mobile applications. They are also easy to verify and do not require server-side storage, which can help to reduce the load on servers. However, it's important to keep the secret key used to sign the JWTs secure to prevent unauthorized access.

JSON Web Tokens (JWTs) can be encrypted for additional security, and when they are, they are commonly referred to as JWEs, which stands for JSON Web Encryption.

The main difference between a JWT and a JWE is that the latter includes an additional layer of encryption for the payload, while a JWT is only signed. This means that while a JWT's contents are not readable by an unauthorized party, it is still possible for someone to read the claims contained within it.

In contrast, a JWE encrypts the entire payload, including the claims, making it unreadable to anyone who doesn't have the decryption key. This added layer of security makes JWEs a good choice when transmitting sensitive or private data, such as medical records or financial information.

To decrypt a JWE, the receiver must have access to the decryption key, which can be stored on the server or exchanged between parties using a secure key exchange mechanism. Once the JWE is decrypted, the receiver can access the original payload in the same way they would with a JWT.
